---
authors:
  - isuruf
tags: [infrastructure]
---

# Lightweight versions of gdal/pdal

GDAL (Geospatial Data Abstraction Library) is a translator library for raster and vector
geospatial data formats. Being a translator library supporting multiple different geospatial
data formats it has a lot of libraries as dependencies. For eg: hdf5 for HDF5 package format
support. PDAL (Point Data Abstraction Library) is a library built on top of GDAL and had
similar support for package formats.

Looking at the history a bit, initial commit to the gdal-feedstock which builds the conda
pacagae, used a few packages including `hdf4, hdf5, postgresql, libnetcdf, kealib`.
(A little bit of history: conda-forge was started by a few people which included a couple
of oceanographers who wanted a way to distribute gdal easily. Hence gdal-feedstock is
one of the first feedstocks to be made in conda-forge and was the 49th PR on staged-recipes)

Since then, more dependencies have been added to gdal conda package and growing to
113 direct and indirect dependencies on macOS. With the huge number of dependencies, the
solve times and download times go up and creating images out of these conda package results
in large images. This is not desirable and we want to remedy that using deferred plugins
support in GDAL/PDAL.

## Deferred C++ plugin loading

[GDAL RFC 96](https://gdal.org/development/rfc/rfc96_deferred_plugin_loading.html) enables
the support of deferred plugins. Plugins in GDAL supports the various raster and vector
geospatial data formats. These plugins are usually built in to the core library
`libgdal.(dylib/so/dll)`, but RFC 96 introduced deferred plugins that builds these plugins
separately and the dependencies are needed only for these plugins.
For eg: instead of HDF5 being a dependency of `libgdal.(dylib/so/dll)`, there's a new
`gdal_HDF5.(dylib/so/dll)` which has a HDF5 dependency and is loaded by the libgdal core
library.

This allows us to package the plugins as separate conda packages and therefore the core
library can remain small while giving the enabling full functionality of GDAL through
these plugins. A nice feature of RFC 96 is that the core libgdal library will output a
customizable error message when a plugin fails to load. For example when hdf5 plugin
is in a separate package called libgdal-hdf5, we can introduce an error message that says

    You may install it with 'conda install -c conda-forge libgdal-hdf5'.

This was used for `libarrow/libparquet` dependency at first since it is a big dependency
and espeacially because we support four different major versions on conda-forge. By
separating this dependency, only the plugin needs to be built for the four different
arrow/parquet versions as opposed to the core libgdal library being built for the four
different versions. The conda package for the plugin was called `libgdal-arrow-parquet`
and depended on the core library conda package `libgdal` which included the rest of the
plugins.

## libgdal-core and libgdal

In order to generalize the above strategy to more plugins, we are now introducing a
`libgdal-core` conda package and more plugins as conda packages with all plugins
(except arrow/parquet) being installable with `libgdal`. We also made the python
bindings depend on `libgdal-core` instead of `libgdal` so that users can select the
plugins that they need.

gdal conda packages

- ``libgdal-core`` - core C++ library
- ``libgdal`` - core C++ library and all plugins
- ``gdal`` - python library without the plugins

gdal plugin conda packages

- ``libgdal-arrow-parquet``: `vector.arrow` and `vector.parquet` drivers as a plugin
- ``libgdal-fits``: `raster.fits` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-grib``: `raster.grib` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-hdf4``: `raster.hdf4` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-hdf5``: `raster.hdf5` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-jp2openjpeg``: `raster.jp2openjpeg` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-kea``: `raster.kea` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-netcdf``: `raster.netcdf` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-pdf``: `raster.pdf` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-postgisraster``: `raster.postgisraster` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-pg``: `vector.pg` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-tiledb``: `raster.tiledb` driver as a plugin
- ``libgdal-xls``: `vector.xls` driver as a plugin

`libgdal` has 113 direct/indirect dependencies, but `libgdal-core` has only
48 direct/indirect dependencies.

If you are missing plugins with the new split, you can do:

    conda install libgdal

to install all the plugins or install individual plugins:

    conda install libgdal-hdf5

Currently only the python bindings `gdal` depend on `libgdal-core` and in the
future more and more downstream packages of `libgdal` will depend on `libgdal-core`
and individual plugins needed for their usage. Therefore we recommend either
installing `libgdal` or explicitly installing the individual plugins.

We looked at the install times for `libgdal` vs `libgdal-core` on Github actions
and `libgdal-core` was faster. We also noticed that `libboost-headers` was being
pulled by `libkml` which is only needed for development. We split the `libkml`
conda package into `libkml` and `libkml-devel` so that end users are not going
to end up with the `libboost-headers` which has thousands of header files.

|OS       | libgdal without KML split | libgdal with KML split | libgdal-core |
| ------- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| Windows | 3m 8s | 1m 6s | 43s   |
| Linux   | 28s   | 21s   | 16s   |
| macOS   | 27s   | 22s   | 15s   |

Note that the timings are from a quick testing on Github actions and is not
benchmarked properly.

## libpdal and libpdal-core

Similar to `libgdal` and `libgdal-core`, we have introduced `libpdal` and
`libpdal-core` conda packages. Previously `pdal` conda package provided
only the C++ library, but now it also provides the python package to match the
`gdal` conda package.

## Ackowledgements

This work was funded by Hobu, Inc in collaboration with Quansight, Inc.
